<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
	xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
	epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0"
	xml:lang="en-GB">

<head>
	<title>Chapter I</title>
	<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
	<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
		<section id="chapter-1-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Physical Meaning of Geometrical Propositions.</p>
			</header>
			<p>In your schooldays most of you who read this book made acquaintance with the noble building of Euclid’s
				geometry, and you remember⁠—perhaps with more respect than love⁠—the magnificent structure, on the lofty
				staircase of which you were chased about for uncounted hours by conscientious teachers. By reason of our
				past experience, you would certainly regard everyone with disdain who should pronounce even the most
				out-of-the-way proposition of this science to be untrue. But perhaps this feeling of proud certainty
				would leave you immediately if someone were to ask you: “What, then, do you mean by the assertion that
				these propositions are true?” Let us proceed to give this question a little consideration.</p>
			<p>Geometry sets out form certain conceptions such as “plane,” “point,” and “straight line,” with which we
				are able to associate more or less definite ideas, and from certain simple propositions (axioms) which,
				in virtue of these ideas, we are inclined to accept as “true.” Then, on the basis of a logical process,
				the justification of which we feel ourselves compelled to admit, all remaining propositions are shown to
				follow from those axioms, <i><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr></i> they are proven. A
				proposition is then correct (“true”) when it has been derived in the recognised manner from the axioms.
				The question of “truth” of the individual geometrical propositions is thus reduced to one of the “truth”
				of the axioms. Now it has long been known that the last question is not only unanswerable by the methods
				of geometry, but that it is in itself entirely without meaning. We cannot ask whether it is true that
				only one straight line goes through two points. We can only say that Euclidean geometry deals with
				things called “straight lines,” to each of which is ascribed the property of being uniquely determined
				by two points situated on it. The concept “true” does not tally with the assertions of pure geometry,
				because by the word “true” we are eventually in the habit of designating always the correspondence with
				a “real” object; geometry, however, is not concerned with the relation of the ideas involved in it to
				objects of experience, but only with the logical connection of these ideas among themselves.</p>
			<p>It is not difficult to understand why, in spite of this, we feel constrained to call the propositions of
				geometry “true.” Geometrical ideas correspond to more or less exact objects in nature, and these last
				are undoubtedly the exclusive cause of the genesis of those ideas. Geometry ought to refrain from such a
				course, in order to give to its structure the largest possible logical unity. The practice, for example,
				of seeing in a “distance” two marked positions on a practically rigid body is something which is lodged
				deeply in our habit of thought. We are accustomed further to regard three points as being situated on a
				straight line, if their apparent positions can be made to coincide for observation with one eye, under
				suitable choice of our place of observation.</p>
			<p>If, in pursuance of our habit of thought, we now supplement the propositions of Euclidean geometry by the
				single proposition that two points on a practically rigid body always correspond to the same distance
				(line-interval), independently of any changes in position to which we may subject the body, the
				propositions of Euclidean geometry then resolve themselves into propositions on the possible relative
				position of practically rigid bodies.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1"
					epub:type="noteref">1</a> Geometry which has been supplemented in this way is then to be treated as
				a branch of physics. We can now legitimately ask as to the “truth” of geometrical propositions
				interpreted in this way, since we are justified in asking whether these propositions are satisfied for
				those real things we have associated with the geometrical ideas. In less exact terms we can express this
				by saying that by the “truth” of a geometrical proposition in this sense we understand its validity for
				a construction with rule and compasses.</p>
			<p>Of course the conviction of the “truth” of geometrical propositions in this sense is founded exclusively
				on rather incomplete experience. For the present we shall assume the “truth” of the geometrical
				propositions, then at a later stage (in the general theory of relativity) we shall see that this “truth”
				is limited, and we shall consider the extent of its limitation.</p>
		</section>
	</section>
</body>

</html>