<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
	xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
	epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0"
	xml:lang="en-GB">

<head>
	<title>Chapter XVIII</title>
	<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
	<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
		<section id="chapter-2-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
				</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Special and General Principle of Relativity.</p>
			</header>
			<p>The basal principle, which was the pivot of all our previous considerations, was the <i>special</i>
				principle of relativity, <i><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr></i> the principle of the
				physical relativity of all <i>uniform</i> motion. Let as once more analyse its meaning carefully.</p>
			<p>It was at all times clear that, from the point of view of the idea it conveys to us, every motion must be
				considered only as a relative motion. Returning to the illustration we have frequently used of the
				embankment and the railway carriage, we can express the fact of the motion here taking place in the
				following two forms, both of which are equally justifiable:</p>
			<ul>
				<li class="numberedItem"><span class="itemNumber">(<i>a</i>)</span> The carriage is in motion relative
					to the embankment,</li>
				<li class="numberedItem"><span class="itemNumber">(<i>b</i>)</span> The embankment is in motion relative
					to the carriage.</li>
			</ul>
			<p>In (<i>a</i>) the embankment, in (<i>b</i>) the carriage, serves as the body of reference in our
				statement of the motion taking place. If it is simply a question of detecting or of describing the
				motion involved, it is in principle immaterial to what reference-body we refer the motion. As already
				mentioned, this is self-evident, but it must not be confused with the much more comprehensive statement
				called “the principle of relativity,” which we have taken as the basis of our investigations.</p>
			<p>The principle we have made use of not only maintains that we may equally well choose the carriage or the
				embankment as our reference-body for the description of any event (for this, too, is self-evident). Our
				principle rather asserts what follows: If we formulate the general laws of nature as they are obtained
				from experience, by making use of</p>
			<ul>
				<li class="numberedItem"><span class="itemNumber">(<i>a</i>)</span> the embankment as reference-body,
				</li>
				<li class="numberedItem"><span class="itemNumber">(<i>b</i>)</span> the railway carriage as
					reference-body,</li>
			</ul>
			<p>then these general laws of nature (<i><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr></i> the laws of
				mechanics or the law of the propagation of light <i>in vacuo</i>) have exactly the same form in both
				cases. This can also be expressed as follows: For the <i>physical</i> description of natural processes,
				neither of the reference bodies <span class="inlineMath"><i>K</i></span>, <span
					class="inlineMath"><i>K′</i></span> is unique (lit. “specially marked out”) as compared with the
				other. Unlike the first, this latter statement need not of necessity hold <i>a priori</i>; it is not
				contained in the conceptions of “motion” and “reference-body” and derivable from them; only
				<i>experience</i> can decide as to its correctness or incorrectness.</p>
			<p>Up to the present, however, we have by no means maintained the equivalence of <i>all</i> bodies of
				reference <span class="inlineMath"><i>K</i></span> in connection with the formulation of natural laws.
				Our course was more on the following lines. In the first place, we started out from the assumption that
				there exists a reference-body <span class="inlineMath"><i>K</i></span>, whose condition of motion is
				such that the Galileian law holds with respect to it: A particle left to itself and sufficiently far
				removed from all other particles moves uniformly in a straight line. With reference to <span
					class="inlineMath"><i>K</i></span> (Galileian reference-body) the laws of nature were to be as
				simple as possible. But in addition to <span class="inlineMath"><i>K</i></span>, all bodies of reference
				<span class="inlineMath"><i>K′</i></span> should be given preference in this sense, and they should be
				exactly equivalent to <span class="inlineMath"><i>K</i></span> for the formulation of natural laws,
				provided that they are in a state of <i>uniform rectilinear and non-rotary motion</i> with respect to
				<span class="inlineMath"><i>K</i></span>; all these bodies of reference are to be regarded as Galileian
				reference-bodies. The validity of the principle of relativity was assumed only for these
				reference-bodies, but not for others (<i><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr></i> those
				possessing motion of a different kind). In this sense we speak of the special principle of relativity,
				or <i>special</i> theory of relativity.</p>
			<p>In contrast to this we wish to understand by the “general principle of relativity” the following
				statement: All bodies of reference <span class="inlineMath"><i>K</i></span>, <span
					class="inlineMath"><i>K′</i></span>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, are equivalent for the description of
				natural phenomena (formulation of the general laws of nature), whatever may be their state of motion.
				But before proceeding farther, it ought to be pointed out that this formulation must be replaced later
				by a more abstract one, for reasons which will become evident at a later stage.</p>
			<p>Since the introduction of the special principle of relativity has been justified, every intellect which
				strives after generalisation must feel the temptation to venture the step towards the general principle
				of relativity. But a simple and apparently quite reliable consideration seems to suggest that, for the
				present at any rate, there is little hope of success in such an attempt; Let us imagine ourselves
				transferred to our old friend the railway carriage, which is travelling at a uniform rate. As long as it
				is moving uniformly, the occupant of the carriage is not sensible of its motion, and it is for this
				reason that he can without reluctance interpret the facts of the case as indicating that the carriage is
				at rest, but the embankment in motion. Moreover, according to the special principle of relativity, this
				interpretation is quite justified also from a physical point of view.</p>
			<p>If the motion of the carriage is now changed into a nonuniform motion, as for instance by a powerful
				application of the brakes, then the occupant of the carriage experiences a correspondingly powerful jerk
				forwards. The retarded motion is manifested in the mechanical behaviour of bodies relative to the person
				in the railway carriage. The mechanical behaviour is different from that of the case previously
				considered, and for this reason it would appear to be impossible that the same mechanical laws hold
				relatively to the nonuniformly moving carriage, as hold with reference to the carriage when at rest or
				in uniform motion. At all events it is clear that the Galileian law does not hold with respect to the
				nonuniformly moving carriage. Because of this, we feel compelled at the present juncture to grant a kind
				of absolute physical reality to nonuniform motion, in opposition to the general principle of relativity.
				But in what follows we shall soon see that this conclusion cannot be maintained.</p>
		</section>
	</section>
</body>

</html>