<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
	xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
	epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0"
	xml:lang="en-GB">

<head>
	<title>Chapter XXX</title>
	<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
	<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
		<section id="chapter-3-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</span>
				</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Cosmological Difficulties of Newton’s Theory</p>
			</header>
			<p>Apart from the difficulty discussed in Section XXI, there is a second fundamental
				difficulty attending classical celestial mechanics, which, to the best of my knowledge, was first
				discussed in detail by the astronomer Seeliger. If we ponder over the question as to how the universe,
				considered as a whole, is to be regarded, the first answer that suggests itself to us is surely this: As
				regards space (and time) the universe is infinite. There are stars everywhere, so that the density of
				matter, although very variable in detail, is nevertheless on the average everywhere the same. In other
				words: However far we might travel through space, we should find everywhere an attenuated swarm of fixed
				stars of approximately the same kind and density.</p>
			<p>This view is not in harmony with the theory of Newton. The latter theory rather requires that the
				universe should have a kind of centre in which the density of the stars is a maximum, and that as we
				proceed outwards from this centre the group-density of the stars should diminish, until finally, at
				great distances, it is succeeded by an infinite region of emptiness. The stellar universe ought to be a
				finite island in the infinite ocean of space<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26"
					epub:type="noteref">26</a>.</p>
			<p>This conception is in itself not very satisfactory. It is still less satisfactory because it leads to the
				result that the light emitted by the stars and also individual stars of the stellar system are
				perpetually passing out into infinite space, never to return, and without ever again coming into
				interaction with other objects of nature. Such a finite material universe would be destined to become
				gradually but systematically impoverished.</p>
			<p>In order to escape this dilemma, Seeliger suggested a modification of Newton’s law, in which he assumes
				that for great distances the force of attraction between two masses diminishes more rapidly than would
				result from the inverse square law. In this way it is possible for the mean density of matter to be
				constant everywhere, even to infinity, without infinitely large gravitational fields being produced. We
				thus free ourselves from the distasteful conception that the material universe ought to possess
				something of the nature of a centre. Of course we purchase our emancipation from the fundamental
				difficulties mentioned, at the cost of a modification and complication of Newton’s law which has neither
				empirical nor theoretical foundation. We can imagine innumerable laws which would serve the same
				purpose, without our being able to state a reason why one of them is to be preferred to the others; for
				any one of these laws would be founded just as little on more general theoretical principles as is the
				law of Newton.</p>
		</section>
	</section>
</body>

</html>